---
title: Micro-Draft Magic
---

I've been a fan of Magic The Gathering for a really long time - I played my
first games in 1994, I have a 4-digit DCI number, and I've played a huge number
of formats over the years. So it's not lightly that I declare that I have an
absolute favorite format, eclipsing all others. What might be surprising is
that this format is one that I've never seen played outside the small group of
friends with whom I developed it. We call it Micro-Draft Magic.

The underlying principle of micro-draft Magic is simple; with two or three
people, you draft 3 packs of cards (one pack each, or a 3-pack Winston draft
for two people) and then build 20 card decks. Then, you play an ordinary game
of Magic, with one modification: if, at any time you are compelled to draw a
card and your library is empty, you may shuffle your graveyard into your
library. If you cannot then draw a card, you lose the game. 

It seems like this format should feel a lot like ordinary Magic, but it plays
vastly different. For starters, these tiny decks are remarkably consistent:
mana problems are rare, and you're very likely to get all the pieces for a 2-
or 3-card combo even if you only have one copy of each card in your tiny deck.
If you can end up with an empty deck and just a few cards in your graveyard,
those cards end up being what you play every turn, which leads to remarkable 
combos and interactions; in a game I played yesterday, I was able to obtain a
virtual lock against my opponent by playing a bunch of card draw and a single 
Captivating Gyre. Most importantly, though, is how the interactions with your 
opponent(s) change.

When you're playing with 20-card decks, you're almost certain to go through
your entire deck, or close to it, in the course of a game. Where things get
really interesting is when you play a series of games against the same opponent
with the same decks - usually we'll play best 2 out of 3, or 3 of 5. After the
first game, you know __every card that your opponent will play__. Moreover, as
the game progresses, you know ever more about the plays that are available to
them, and are forced to play with careful attention to their possible moves.
In practice, this makes for incredibly complex and engaging game play; it makes
it more like a game of perfect information. 

When playing this in a 3-player configuration, we will sometimes draft 2 packs
each and use 24-card decks, and we play in a triangle where each pair of
players has a shared pool of 20 life. This works kind of like 2-Headed Giant
when you're on defense, and the fact that both of your opponents are also your
partners turn by turn makes for a very balanced 3-player game; while you get to
gang up on defense, everyone is alone on offense so there aren't the usual
dynamics where two people can eliminate the third and then fight it out between
themselves.

I've been playing this micro-draft format with friends for a couple of years
now, and it's become my favorite 2-player format by a long ways. It's
inexpensive relative to a normal draft, and the complexity of the game play and
the way that being able to reshuffle your graveyard changes the game dynamics
makes enough of a difference that it substantially changes card valuations
relative to more standard draft formats. If you give one of these formats a
try, please let me know what you think of the format in the comments!
